[OKR#418] Environment Synchronization (#144)
infinum/rails-handbook: Workflows/Environment Synchronization.md

## Environment Synchronization
A synchronization of environments, or more precisely, a synchronization of the data used in different environments,
is usually necessary when you need to work in an environment that is as production-like as possible, but you don't have

> access to production itself, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
access to production itself, for example:

```

I think you'll need an extra space for the formatting to kick in (bullets below)

* when you need to debug a more complex issue occuring in production

> * when you need data that is as close to production as possible (both when it comes to type and amount)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* when you need data that is as close to production as possible (both when it comes to type, relationships, value distribution and amount)
```

> for development and/or testing purposes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for development and/or testing purposes.
```

Author: I wouldn't add a full stop at the end of a bullet point that is not a full sentence in its own right

Reviewer 2: fudge, the line split weird on my screen, carry on 😄

> Access to production is normally limited in order to protect the private information of users, among other things.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Access to production data is normally limited in order to ensure end user privacy.
```

The same should be ensured once this data is copied to another environment. In order to limit the number
of developers who have access to raw production data, it would be best if that data was anonymized by someone
from the DevOps team before it is given to the developer. To achieve this, the Rails team has agreed with
the DevOps team that the synchronization process should look like this:

> 1. a completely new environment is set up

Reviewer 2: When we say completely new, can it be an existing staging/uat one?

Author: Technically it could be staging or UAT, but the idea is that the production database in its raw state is copied to an env that the developer doesn't have access to and that it is anonymized there before being put in any place that can be accessed by someone other than a devops person.

Reviewer 2: Ahh so its not a fully fledged environment, just enough to copy over the DB, do work on it and then push to to S3 👍

2. the production database is copied to this new environment
3. anonymization is run on the copied production database
4. the anonymized database is dumped
5. the anonymized database dump is copied to a destination of choice (e.g. S3 bucket)

> 6. the anonymized database dump is downloaded to the destination environment (staging, development, etc.)

Reviewer 2: We should probably add a step for removing the dump (even if its anonymized)  after its pulled by the dev. I hope its not put into a public bucket?

Author: The whole AWS setup is something to be agreed with the devops team. They will have to set up a user with the appropriate permissions, etc., but I will add a warning here just so this does not go unsaid.

7. a dump of the local database is generated as a backup
8. the local database schema is reset
9. the anonymized database dump is imported/restored to the local database

Keep in mind that all the steps up until and including step #5 require the involvement of the DevOps team.

> The remaining steps can be automated using the copy_bot gem, which is explained later in this chapter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The remaining steps can be automated using the [copy_bot](linkybinky) gem, which is explained later in this chapter.
```

In addition to this, for the devops team to be able to anonymize the production database, you first need to provide
them with a way to do that. One such solution is described in the following section.

### Data anonymization
Data anonymization is a form of information sanitization intended to protect private information contained in
the database. It can be performed when it is necessary to work with production data during testing and/or debugging of
an issue, but also to fulfill GDPR requirements. In the first case, personal information is anonymized only when it is
needed (e.g. after copying the production database) and only in non-production environments. However, in the case of
GDPR compliance, it may need to be done in regular intervals in the production environment.

The required final result may also be different depending on the use case.
It may be enough to replace the sensitive data with random strings, but sometimes this is not a good solution if it
prevents the app from functioning properly. In the latter case it is more appropriate to replace real data with

> fake data: fake names to replace the names of real persons, fake phone numbers

Reviewer 2: Synthetic could be used here instead of fake, what do you think @cukoreva ?

Author: Faker is included here just as an example, it's not part of the gem, and the developer implementing the anonymization in their project can choose whatever they want (they don't even have to go with a gem, but can implement some logic of their own).

Reviewer 2: I actually meant the "fake" adjective by itself, not the Faker gem references. Fake has a bit of negative connotation in my head

Author: I get it now :) I'll update the sentence.

that are in the same format as the real phone numbers, etc. - this is called *pseudonymization*.

Since each project has different models and attributes, and consequently different personally identifiable
information that needs to be anonymized, as well as different needs for anonymization and pseudonymization,
there is no single universal solution for all of them. However, there is a proposed solution you can check out:

> the `anonymize.rb` script in the JSONAPI Example App.

Reviewer 2: linky binky

Author: I wouldn't add a link here because if we change something in the Example App, we'll have to update this chapter as well. More specifically, this script is located at the moment in the `db` folder, and I would prefer to have everything in `app/domains`, but this has been postponed for now as zeitwerk is complaining if the scripts is moved to `app/domains` (we need more time to research this and update the `remont` gem accordingly.

The suggested solution uses the [remont gem](https://github.com/infinum/remont) that we have developed to provide us
with a practical DSL for implementing anonymization by writing a simple script. It iterates over the records in
the specified scope and updates each record as it is defined in the script.
In the Example App we have also used the [faker gem](https://github.com/faker-ruby/faker)
to generate pseudo-anonymized data, but if your project requires more complex anonymization logic,
the remont gem also accepts [custom processors](https://github.com/infinum/remont#attributes).

> You should definitely implement some form of anonymization, whether it is a script based on the remont gem or
> a simple SQL query replacing sensitive information with hash strings, in all of the situations described above, but
> also if private information gets to non-production environments in any other way, e.g. through the import of a file
> provided by the client.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You should implement some form of anonymization, whether it is a script based on the remont gem or a simple SQL query replacing sensitive information with hash strings. You should apply the same care to private information that gets to non-production environments in any other way, e.g. through the import of a file provided by the client.
```

```yml
steps:
  download_remote_db_dump:
    s3_credentials:
      access_key_id: <%= Rails.application.secrets.aws_access_key_id %>
      access_key: <%= Rails.application.secrets.aws_secret_access_key %>
      region: <%= Rails.application.secrets.aws_region %>
      bucket: <%= Rails.application.secrets.aws_s3_bucket %>
    source_file_path: '/staging_db_dump.sql'
    destination_file_path: './tmp/downloaded_db_dump.sql'
  create_local_db_backup:
    destination_file_path: './tmp/development_backup.sql'
  drop_local_db_tables:
  import_remote_db_to_local_db:
    remote_db_dump_file_path: './tmp/downloaded_db_dump.sql'
  run_migrations_on_local_db:
  delete_remote_db_dump:
    remote_db_dump_file_path: './tmp/downloaded_db_dump.sql'
  execute_custom_command:
    command: "RAILS_ENV=staging bundle exec rake \"remont[db/s3_sync.rb]\""
```

Not all steps are mandatory. For example, you may have obtained the database dump in some other way,
i.e. not by downloading it from the S3 bucket, or you may not want to delete the downloaded DB dump file.
The option of adding a final custom command can be used to run a rake task for 
file synchronization or any other shell command.

> This gem has also been added to the JSONAPI Example App.

Reviewer: maybe we can link to the JSONAPI Example app here too. SEO for the win ✌️

For instance, if you want to sync entire buckets, keep in mind that the size of the files you are copying to
the destination bucket will affect your AWS costs. Also, if you are copying files from the production environment,
they may contain sensitive data, such as proprietary and/or personally identifiable information that you cannot easily
anonymize.

If you decide to proceed with file synchronization, you can choose to implement the solution we have included in
the JSONAPI Example App. It contains a template (the `s3_sync.rb` script with accompanying classes)
for copying files from one bucket to another for a specified set of records in your database.
The remont gem is a flexible tool that has been reused here and the corresponding rake task can be added as
the final step to the data sync step definitions required by the copy_bot gem or it can be run separately.

The proposed solution uses the remont gem DSL to iterate over records for which you want to copy files from one bucket
to another. For each record the `EnvSync::FileSync::Processor` is called, and this processor calls
the `EnvSync::FileSync::Synchronizer`. You will notice that in the `EnvSync::FileSync::Synchronizer`

> we are just copying one file from one bucket to another. However, you can use this example and adjust it to you needs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we are just copying one file from one bucket to another. However, you can use this example and adjust it to your needs
```

> by simply changing the code in the `copy_file`method or by adding a completely different method, just be sure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by simply changing the code in the `copy_file` method or by adding a completely different method, just be sure
```

> to update the `EnvSync::FileSync::Processor` if necessary.

Reviewer 3: Where are the production (or any other source env) s3 secrets saved for this synchronization?

https://github.com/infinum/rails-jsonapi-example-app/blob/9f5505211435cf4a693aeda780d806d8219b8fa9/app/domains/env_sync/file_sync/synchronizer.rb#L5

I can see here that you have "source" secrets listed, but there's not way to distinguish them between local secrets (e.g. with a prefix of some kind 🤷‍♀️ )
